---
layout: post
title: Talk by Lena Henningsen on Canonization of Improvised Music in China
---

READCHINA's Principal Investigator, [JunProf. Dr. Lena Henningsen](https://www.sinologie.uni-freiburg.de/Mitarbeiterinnen/professorinnen/henningsen), will deliver a digital talk at Heidelberg University as part of a seminar on *Music in China—A Transcultural Affair: The Question of Authenticity* __tomorrow, Tuesday 8 June, at 14:45 (German time)__. The talk will be held online via Zoom, to receive a link, please register by sending an email [to Prof. Barbara Mittler](mailto:barbara.mittler@zo.uni-heidelberg.de). The abstract of the talk follows below:

__Street Music’s Long March into the Concert Hall – On the Canonization of Improvised Music in Twentieth Century China and Resonances of Traditional Musical Practices__

*As part of the enquiry into musical authenticity proposed by this seminar, I will approach the music of the blind street musician Abing (Hua Yanjun 华彦钧, ca. 1893-1950). Shortly before his untimely death, six of his performances (three for erhu and pipa each) were recorded by two ethnomusicologists – which started these pieces journey into the repertoire in performing and teaching Chinese music. The changing reception of Abing as a person, and the changes in the performing styles of his music demonstrate how his music was incorporated into the musical field of the PRC which was itself transforming along with the changes in the larger political field. This canonization preserved Abing’s music as well as it transformed it into pieces compatible with Western symphonic orchestras. This musical transformation may serve to rethink authenticity, also along a transcultural axis: If the transmission of music is not (primarily) based on sheet music, as in the practices from which Abing set off, then change is inscribed into each transmission. In fact, changes to the music are what literally keeps it alive – and which may seem, at first glance, incompatible with the sheet music based Western tradition. However, East-Western musical encounters as they can be observed in the performances of Abing’s music are more than just the confluence of sounds from different parts of the world. Rather, such encounters are shaped by a complex set of musical practices, personal experiences, by institutional and technological change all of which form a complicated web of interactions the end product of which can no longer be identified as either Eastern or Western but transcultural. Likely, this confluence of factors which results in constantly changing musical performances, is what renders this musical practice authentic.*
